Yes.
Yeah.
But anyway, congratulations for that.
Hey, now, we've got a bit of time with you this morning.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
As a committee, as you know, we love asking questions.
I have become accustomed to that reality, yeah, Chair.
Are you comfortable if we just make some-
Mm
... for this occasion, very short remarks, just to try and frame-
Yeah
... the conversation and shape some of the questions.
So thanks, firstly, for inviting us to talk to you about the long-term insight
briefing.
Uh-huh.
And I think you also wanted to maybe spend a short amount of time on the mandamus
order.
Yes.
So-
We've got one member particularly interested.
So I just-
Everyone should be interested.
Draw your attention. If you need to talk about the legal situation-
Yep
... so be upfront.
Awesome. Yeah, so I'll cover that in my opening remarks just in terms of framing
it, because I am able to talk about it to a level, and then there are some
limitations.
But can I just make sure I've introduced my colleagues who are sitting at the
table? You are familiar, I think-
Yes
... we've got Juanita Ryan, deputy chief executive at the moment, Communities,
Partnerships, and Pathways. And Tom Baker, who's our chief
digital officer.
So they're both here.
I assume the chief digital officer's role here is not needing to be
explained. And Juanita obviously brings lots of insight
around the rehabilitative reintegrative services, where we think there's a good
opportunity, and also at the moment is covering the community partnerships and
pathways space where also technology has a quite significant
role to play.
Corrections' LTIB on potential technology changes
looks over the next 25 years and focuses on areas where
technology could potentially help to address issues that may arise in the
future. So very importantly, framing this, this is
future-focused, long-term in outlook to help us plan.
Technology's already an important part of our operations.
I think we've spoken in the past about corrections officers already utilizing
body-worn cameras. Full body scanners having been introduced at some of our
prison sites and what that's then enabled in terms of reducing
strip searching, enabling the same activity to be done in a
much less intrusive way, both for those in our care as well as the officers who
work in that environment. Other technologies, including virtual reality,
for training purposes, have been trialed successfully in some sites.
Prisons though, and I think this is the important point to set context, prisons
specifically are, by design and necessity, hardened
environments. Often built with steel-reinforced concrete, particularly in the high
security, maximum security environment.
And therefore introducing new technology,
particularly on existing assets, can be difficult and expensive, sometimes
making it hard to take full advantage of all available technology both
now and into the future. Despite that, we are focused on having a plan for
how that can be introduced progressively, taking advantage of technology where it
makes sense, but is also affordable.
The LTIB looked at three key areas where technology could be used in the
future to add value or improve efficiency or safety.
Those being in prisons, in the community, and as I've said, in the rehabilitation
or integration space.
And I thought that would be a helpful focus into those three areas because
that's kind of how we've thought about it in the LTIB.
Before I finish, just on the specifics of the mandamus order,
just again to help frame what I will be able to talk about rather than what
is still subject to proceedings,
I will just briefly talk on the mandamus order and the work that is underway as a
result.
It's important to note that the order arose during existing proceedings, and
while it's somewhat independent, I'm going to caveat some of my answers given the
wider matter is still sub judice. So I'll just be clear about where those two
things sit and where I want to maybe take a step back from the
specifics and give you context rather than answering any specific
questions. The order requires that I as chief executive am required to comply
with Section 70 of the Corrections Act, in the administration of
conditions, specifically of detention in units 12 and 13 at Auckland
Prison. That's the maximum security environment.
And the order arose during proceedings focused on two
units at Auckland Prison related to Section 70 of the
act, which provides the detail of the minimum entitlements for exercise.
In short, the judgment touched on several issues, including not consistently
meeting open-air requirement, often due to infrastructure constraints, the
conflation of exercise and time out of cell, and that inadequate resourcing was
not a lawful basis for denying minimum entitlements.
We have responded to this. So it was important that we
heard, understood, and then took action around the issuing of that
mandamus order.
Responding by increasing resourcing, looking at new approaches to unlock
regimes to meet the requirements of the order, and I can confirm that the
circumstances that gave rise to the order have not occurred since those changes
have been made.
So I'll give that as the frame to hopefully then enable as much of a
constructive conversation as possible whilst not traveling into the
license.
Is it subject to appeal? Is that what he's-
That's what I was wondering.
No. Oh, sorry. It is, and we are not appealing that.
So are you finished then?
Yes, I am.
Right. I'm going to go to Timothy Paul-
Can you clarify that?
... first.
Yeah.
To ask him questions.
Yeah. Can we just clarify that?
Yeah.
Because before, we did a bit of research about whether this was still
ongoing, and our understanding was it was Corrections,
was it applied for an appeal, and that was denied by the judge, and that now that
it just is settled. Right?
We're not appealing. The mandamus order-
Yeah
... stands, but it is still part of a wider,
I think the term is interlocutory,
set of matters that is still a live case in the High Court.
Oh.
So that's the interrelationship between the two. There's an order.
That is something that we had to apply and
comply with from the end of last year, and I can talk to that.
Mm.
But I'm not going to talk about any of the wider implications of the case because
that would be sub judice.
Yeah. Okay.
So you go.
Yeah. So,
over the last two yearsThis committee in
interview briefings and during scrutiny week have
asked yourself and your leadership whether Corrections is meeting minimum
entitlements. And from my recollection, it was always
Lee Marshall would answer a lot of the minimum entitlement questions.
Every time, Corrections said to us
that,
"You guys were meeting the minimum entitlements." So it was a bit of a
shock to see the High Court order last year.
So what genuine assurances can
Corrections give to our committee that this is
not just going to be a slap on the wrist for Auckland Prison?
What are you doing to oversee the fulfillment of those entitlements in every
single prison? And what
will be the consequences for the operation of
Auckland Prison not meeting its statutory obligations?
Correct. Okay. Well, I'll,
I think, take a step back in terms of
the specifics of the mandamus order, which was related to units 12 and
13 of Auckland Prison rather than any
sort of wider findings. The context of those two units,
as you'll be aware, I think you visited that environment,
is that they are managing the most complex, violent
people in our system.
And within that context, we have put in
place regimes that try and prioritize what is in our guiding
principles of the Corrections Act under Section 6,
maintaining public safety as our primary and paramount consideration in
decision-making. What that meant for us
on a day-to-day operational basis prior to the mandamus order
was that we were very much wanting to and attempting
to achieve minimum entitlements, particularly the one-hour
access to fresh air every day.
And what we were discovering every day
was that the nature of the volatility of the
individuals and the care required to ensure we were not
inappropriately mixing prisoners in their
open-air space to avoid serious assaults and harm
of prisoner-on-prisoner, as much as the
potential for serious assaults to our officers, that we
were seeing incidents that then enabled us to
apply an exception to achieving minimum entitlements under 69 [2] B
and C, which are enabling us, for reasons of security
of
the prison operations being threatened or health and safety
any person in the prison being threatened, lawful reasons
for why we would, in those situations, not apply
minimum entitlements.
Our step back,
working through this case and responding to the order,
has been for us to confront what we, I think, had drifted into,
given the complexity of the people and our
desire to achieve that paramount consideration of public safety,
we had probably normalized as core regime routine in
those two units,
exceptions almost every day as a result of concerns of
threats to safety and health and safety.
What now, having engaged with the order and having reflected on the
judge's clear consideration and therefore issuing of something that is
obviously a very substantive position, is that we needed to take a
step back and say, "Well, what do we need to do to ensure that we can still
account for the safety of our staff, who do
incredibly difficult work every day with those most violent people in our system,
but still accounts for that as the norm?" Because that is
what that unit is achieving. And we need to
address the resourcing of people to enable us
to operate a regime that normally can achieve those minimum entitlements.
So that was the big change for us in mindset, that we weren't
operating on a default of, well, this is just the resourcing that we've
applied historically to running a maximum security environment.
We now need to think, well, what additional resources do we need?
So what I can confirm as a result of that ruling, that
order, we've invested $2 million per
year in additional frontline staff capability
specifically to those units. That has increased the amount of officers who are
available, increased the number of movements that can occur, has
anticipated the complexity of the interrelationships, and has made
a safe working operation that now properly sees
exception rather than default being threat to prisoner safety or
health and safety concerns every day.
So I can confirm that we are now recording every day with
absolute consistency the adherence to and
achievement of minimum entitlements.
And where that is not achieved, and I think it's important to note, because some
days it won't be, we have got really clear
documentation that 69 [2] B or C,
one or other, has applied but then justifies why, and
we're explicit that that is not as a result of us not adapting and
adjusting our staffing and operating regime.
And I think to your broad question of how can we be assured that doesn't apply
elsewhere,
this particular part of our network and our system is that
if you can imagine a triangle of highest risk, most complex right at the top,
this is right at the top of that
organizational construct. And therefore, I am assured, because we now have that
same record of minimum entitlement achievement across our network, that
this was the exception. This was the area where we had
prioritized as paramount requirement public safety,
and that had allowed us to drift into not saying,
actually, things have changed. The complexity and nature of the prisoners has
become more unpredictable, more violent, and we now need probably to
consider different resourcing to one where the operations weren't
kind of putting their hand up. We unfortunately needed this
orderTo allow us to properly go in and say, "Something's got to change.
We need to adopt a regime that allows us more normally to maintain those
minimum entitlements."
You got another question?
Well, I was keen to kind of-
Duncan Webb.
I'll just suck on that.
Yeah.
Just that last comment just made me really raise an eyebrow, which was, we
needed this order. You knew once it was drawn to your
attention, and it clearly was, prior to proceedings being filed,
you knew you weren't complying with the legal obligations.
Why did it
require a judge, a
hearing and a judge to say,
"Do what the law says,"
for the corrections to respond in the way it has?
If I may,
our view of our position was that we were lawfully applying the
intent of the act. I referenced the Section 6 principles, the
paramount consideration being public safety above all other things,
and therefore it did need to be tested.
And so from our perspective-
So your view, if I've got the case right, your view was
you were having resourcing constraints,
which meant you couldn't safely
deliver under Section 70, and that was justified.
Is that essentially, in a nutshell, your case?
That is a simplified version of how we
were operating the site. We had considered
the risks and the considerations of how we achieved safe
operations in that particular unit, those two units.
And our response was to ensure safety was the paramount
consideration, and how we then worked our way through that was
ensuring that we could confirm that first before anything else, and
that was the way in which officers
in the line of fire, so to speak, were considering their
ability to weigh on a case-by-case,
day-by-day basis, whether or not what they were experiencing with a
particular prisoner being particularly aggressive or particularly violent on that
day amounted to a justification for exception
two. And that just gave us the opportunity to reflect, having heard from a judge
how they'd interpreted the law.
Right.
Because there are exceptions in cases of emergency and so on to
not comply with-
And threats to safety of prisoners or staff-
Right
... and threats to health and safety of prisoners as well.
But what has been proven by your, the case and your actions is that
properly resourced, this was a systemic problem of
under-resourcing.
Mm.
Rather than
some ongoing emergency.
That's the question.
Well, I would
be happy to debate that in terms of, until we got that crystallized for
us, our proposition was we were
weighing two very complex and careful things about
what is the bar, what are the standards of 69 (2) B
and C in every single circumstance for every single prisoner in that
most complex space, and whether or not, and I think this is what I've
tried to convey, whether or not in each circumstance we
had drifted into a mode where we were
almost assuming, because of the people who we were managing there,
that every day we were going to
have a set of circumstances where there would be exceptions that would mean minimum
entitlements wouldn't be met.
From what I heard you say before,
my reading of what you said before, and it's interesting, the interpretation,
is that the way you were operating,
you
had interpreted the law to be
such that you could operate the way you were operating.
Correct.
Right.
Correct. That's exactly the point.
And so up to the point of the time that the judge came out with his/her
opinion-
Yep
...
it was at that point.
Because that's what I thought you were trying to say before.
It's exactly what I was trying to say. Thank you.
But now what you've said is now that you recognize, you obviously recognize the
decision, you're spending 2 million a year to try and rectify.
Correct.
Yeah. And I might-
Exactly.
I might make my question wrap into the long term, if that's helpful.
Yeah, please.
Because I appreciate the answer,
but this is not the first time that Corrections has been
challenged over the provision of minimum entitlements, because during COVID,
obviously, there was a crisis that justified the reduction of meeting those
targets.
Yep.
But when we moved out of lockdown and when it was safe to go back to normal,
Corrections were not, I think it was at Arohata Women's Prison,
were not meeting minimum entitlements.
So this is not the first time that this has come up, which is what makes
me wonder whether this is a system-wide issue.
And from my observations, I wonder whether-
Well, next question
... this is going to the long-term bit. Hang on, just please let me finish.
It seems to me that a lot of the resourcing is going towards increasing
capacity of our prisons and managing the increase in prison population,
which has increased by nearly 1,000 people during your tenure as Chief Executive of
Corrections, as opposed to the quality of
providing the basic minimum entitles
entitled to every prisoner, regardless of the severeness or
seriousness of their offending.
Yep.
What you are describing is the period
during and then at the end of COVID, where I think I
have come to this committee in its various forms and acknowledged and
talked about the weighing of public safety being paramount,
our need to ensure that we had sufficient staff who were able to then
undertake safe work as we were transitioning and experiencing high turnover,
the need to recruit as demand increased, and how we managed
those tensions across our network.
So what I would acknowledge is as a result of
context changing and our need to be able to account for ourselves absolutely
explicitly that we were achieving minimum entitlements, which
historically were just that we are.
For the previous period from 1995 until
2022/23, there was no explicit
documented position that was assuring everyone that
every single person was achieving every single minimum entitlement in every single
day, but for the exceptions. We are now in a position
whereCOVID and the period out
required us to be able to evidence that we were achieving those things.
And what we are now, this is where the technology kind of link comes in,
we are now in a mode where
we have the opportunity, starting in unit
12 and 13 at Auckland Prison, to start to
remove
the need for officers to be tied up using their own
documented approach to recording all of these things, and
try and prioritize their time being connected to those in
our care, rather than documenting those things.
So we are not in a place where it's a live thing yet.
But what we have seen in this work is
humans undertaking lots of documented record
keeping is not the most effective and efficient,
beneficial use of their time. Where technology can play a part,
potentially, is the use of CCTV camera footage,
the connection of that back into our systems, and that to become more of an
automated approach to that absolute, credible,
auditable, documented record, freeing up
officer time. So that's for us what I think extending
our existing technology to something that will help us in the
future reduce the administrative burden on our
officers, free them up to spend more time, and create an even stronger
evidence trail than
what we have today. Because it's a human-based system rather than a machine-based
system at the moment.
Can I just-- I want to go back to the member's original-
Yep
... question.
Yep.
And I think she's, the second time she's asked the question.
What this committee wants to be assured-
Yep
...
is as of today-
Yep
... can you give assurance to the committee that,
the minimum standards or whatever in terms of care-
Minimum entitlements, yep.
Whatever way you do it, that's for you.
But the committee wants to be assured that you are meeting
those, and if you're not, we would love to know where you
have areas of concern and by when you would expect to
address it. I think that was what the member was originally asking.
If I-
So I can keep it short
... I'm paraphrasing, but.
I can keep it short and say, yes, we are achieving those.
And our assurance process for that is, we now have-
The data
... measures for every single minimum entitlement, for every single prisoner
at every single site, and that is being reported on a daily basis.
So what all I'm reflecting on in terms of then moving into the technology
is, that is a resource, administratively burdensome
part of an officer's day, which is important
that we can do from a accounting for ourselves and
demonstrating adherence. But technology in the future
has probably got a really important part to play in being able to automate
that part of what our responsibilities are, to then free back up officer
time, which I think is far more appropriately spent
engaging with those in our care, trying to get them on a more positive
pathway so they leave us better with brighter prospects.
So that's the link, if you like, between-
Right. Are we clear on-
... an important conversation and the alternative.
On that link.
Okay, I'm going to go to a new line of questioning now to Mr. Todd Simpson.
Well, thank you. We'll kind of pick up because I think obviously you said
technology focus in the insights briefing, long-term insights briefing.
Yep.
Community prisons, rehabilitation.
I think we've covered prisons a bit.
Yep.
But keen to understand a bit more what you're thinking in the rehabilitation space
because yeah, kind of what did you uncover in putting together the
briefing around how technology could help?
Because obviously,
yeah, we want to make sure that there is opportunities for people
that are in your care to get rehabilitation.
Yeah. So, I think
acknowledging in my setup that there are really
material barriers to just
introducing what we might all view as normal technology into
a prison context, the hard infrastructure part.
We have
significant
pilot examples where the use of things like virtual reality,
which has been used particularly for the education part of
our services,
is a really valuable vehicle to drive engagement,
to drive connection to something beyond the institutional setting,
and can really give a lift to the educational
attainments that would otherwise
perhaps not be as beneficial. So I think our reflection is virtual
reality is a really valuable tool that's been particularly effective,
as say, in education and training, giving people access to some
certification, qualification that otherwise might not be as practical within a
prison context.
And it's shown real gains in terms of those things.
I'll turn to my colleagues who are probably much more knowledgeable on this, but I
would say what we have seen in other jurisdictions is a move
to then include more than education and training
within that virtual reality space.
And that, for me, is quite an interesting area to watch because
at a human level, I can perhaps appreciate with what is possible
now with virtual reality, the opportunity to move people out of
what they would have as their day-to-day world into something very different, which
might be super helpful in helping them shift their behaviors
and mindset.
So that might be an interesting area to focus on, that Juanita might have a view,
and then Tom from a delivery perspective.
And then the second bit is secure online learning and the ability
to ensure that we are
keeping abreast with how training and education is being
delivered with those normal polytech type
courses. And it's been critical for us to be able to shift our mode to
enable more and more access of an online nature rather than what has
historically been necessary to be our model, face-to-face
deliveryAnd that is becoming less and less the mode for some of that
delivery. But I don't know whether you've got any reflections, Juanita, around
virtual reality, broadening those to other services,
what you might have as a perspective in terms of how that might work
with kind of evidence and practice in some of those services, because there'll be
pros and cons, right?
Yeah, there will be. And in terms of virtual reality within
the offense-focused rehabilitative context,
I'm actually not aware of how that is being
utilized overseas specifically.
But I do know virtual reality more widely for mental health services for
some forms of specific
illnesses that people might have, has been trialed
from probably the late '90s in New Zealand around how we support people to
overcome some of those within kind of real-time or real-looking
contexts. So some of that would be particularly useful
for us to consider in a prison context, where it's also very challenging for people
to be in the real-life context.
And the relevance of that to us, I think, is that helps set people up for mental
health barriers that are really challenging them to engage in offense-focused rehab
proper.
As Jeremy said, in terms of virtual reality for education, we've had some really
good
trials of this within the Department of Corrections and with some really good
outcomes in terms of people being able to achieve some
NCEA-level results. Not across the
spectrum, or across the suite, or across the country,
but certainly something that we are seeing some real green shoots from.
Okay. So I'm going to Dr Tracy McLennan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So I had a couple of questions, and Tom, you're probably
best placed to answer,
because the long-term briefing is really interesting.
No free lunches here, Tom.
But the briefing's really interesting, so I'm pleased that you're turning your mind
to all of the
potentials out there. But it's really important that the plans remain
adaptable, as you'll know, because
rather than being sort of locking in systems that are quickly going to be outdated.
So I'm assuming that that's forming part of your thinking as well.
So that's one question, and also noting that
the report talks about how new tech can change how crime is
detected and managed. So have you also considered whether
that sort of increased use of tech could itself
drive changes in prison demand over time?
I don't know if that was sufficiently sort of taken into account in
the briefing.
Okay, let's do those two. We're running out of time a bit.
Yeah. Look, my interactions with my peers and colleagues, not
just in New Zealand but in Australia, suggest that not really
in reduction of crime. However, there is a view
around how we could detect
just certain interactions between individuals within the custodial environment,
and then what could come about as a result of the data that then falls out of that,
that we could then leverage
for prisons operations perspective.
Because you can imagine a situation where internal charges, that changes the nature
of
potentially what you're monitoring, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Do you just want to touch on, I think the first question was sort of pushing
into the how do you maintain progress,
long-term view of where you're trying to get to without what you're doing becoming
outdated before
you've even done it. Did I feel some of that in your question?
Yeah.
Because I think that sort of speaks to the three phases-
Yeah
... of your digital SOI.
Yeah. So our focus in our digital statement intent is about
strengthening, enhancing, and transforming.
And so what we're attempting to do with that is stay
connected to, again, my peers, both here and not
just in the public sector but the private sector, but also across the ditch in
Australia. So on behalf of Corrections, I chair the emerging
technologies group of people that sit across the
corrections environment, and we meet quite regularly every quarter.
And the things that we talk about and discuss is the emergence of technology
and the longevity of that in terms of its use within our
environment. So we focus on particular areas.
Topics that we've touched on, virtual reality, we have talked about that in the
education space. That has limited time.
We've talked about AI, it seems the topic du jour
of the day, and we know that that in and of itself will have limited time span
as well. So we're trying to think beyond that.
What are the next things that come along that we might have to turn our
minds to in terms of supporting our particular function in
our environment?
Okay. And I think
about our integration offender management system, which is
our core platform where data exists to give us
information about every single person in our care, case noting, ability to
search, document.
That's a legacy system, an old system which has been maintained over
time. We're part of a wider justice system, as you well know.
So the interrelationship between a police system, a justice system, and a
corrections system that need to seamlessly interact
but are at different stages creates a sort of similar tension for us
in terms of when do we start thinking about what might be
next as a different legacy system, versus what do we need to do today
to maintain, stabilize, but sort of improve and enhance the
existing system. So I think IOMS is a really good example of how
we get confidence and assurance that we have a stable
platform whilst Te Reo Neka is
being introduced as the case management system within the courts part of justice,
so that we are ready with a stable platform to then start
to consider how we might shape our future systems
as that starts to come in to perhaps think about, and I think this
is a really important principle that we've used as a
department. We have to know that we have been
really disciplined in the way in which we articulate the operational
activities that we want to happen in a particular way, the
workflow-Before we start ambitiously
describing what the technology needs to be.
Mm.
So until we describe the workflow activities that
will help that work achieve our outcomes, we're not yet ready for the
technology.
Right.
So we're putting the effort into that-
Mm
... whilst Te Aureka is coming on, so that we're in a position to potentially
invest in some of these technologies.
We're running out of time. We're actually over time.
I'm going to have two more questions.
Sorry.
One more from Tracy, and then I'm going-
Very briefly.
Yep.
So I, and that-
Last one
... that largely answered it.
Cool.
So I assume making sure that you're able to measure and monitor-
Correct
... so that it's in service of rehab and-
... to reduce re-offending, not just throughput.
Correct.
Yep.
Okay. Tama Sopor. Last one.
All right. So long term, looking at the makeup of the prison
population-
Yep
... accepting that you don't make the law,
there has been-
All the decisions that come into our agency.
Yeah.
Yep.
Yep. Accepting all of that. The proportion of Māori in prison is
still
worryingly high.
It seems that attempts or efforts to refresh Hōkai Rangi,
despite this committee recommending that, have not gone anywhere, and I'd love to
hear an update if I'm wrong on that.
There was a decision made to
remove the Māori Leadership Advisory Board to your leadership,
and
then to look at the woman's prison population.
That's shot up recently.
Under your leadership, there have been the Waikeria
riots, the high-profile escape of Phillip Smith,
and other really serious incidents, and incidences of
escapes resulting in innocent members of the public being harmed.
Okay, this is long-term insights. So long-term insights.
So let's-
Long-term insight, how are you going to change all of that?
Because it's not a great record.
Okay.
I am-
That's not even touching on the internal allegations of bullying and internal
cultures that is in the media right now.
Yeah. That's lots of
questions. My short answer to that is,
we work in a very complex part of the wider
system of public services. I am incredibly proud of
the work that everyone undertakes every day within a corrections context.
We are but one important part of a whole heap of different
agencies and parties that together leads to the
consequences that you have described.
We have been committed to ensuring that we are confronting some
of the realities in our part of the system.
You mentioned the bullying matters, and I'll reference our approach to
speaking up, standing up, sexual harassment being an absolute focus for us,
and over 2,300 people within our organization have already been
through really extensive training, not because we've told them they must,
but because they have determined that it's the right thing to do as a result of us
pushing in and saying, "It's incredibly important for us
more than anyone else to lead well and to be very conscious
of decency and dignity in all of our work." So I'd just
park that particular point in there.
Yeah.
And I think to your questions around Hōkai Rangi, addressing the
overrepresentation of Māori-
Mm
... and particularly around women,
it is a long-term intractable challenge-
Sure
... that is clearly not a corrections alone issue.
We though have heard and understand our role and responsibility in ensuring
that we don't sit on our hands and do nothing.
And I think
between yourself and other members historically of this
committee,
we have been challenging ourselves as to whether or not
targets or key areas of focus are important to shift
us away from not being able to apply
clear, operationally relevant change to some of these
matters. And so to that end, just last week we had
a pretty engaging conversation. By that I mean
constructive tension in an executive context to ask ourselves,
were we super clear on where we thought we could have the biggest impact to ensure
that we were confident that we were doing all we could, both in
our agency as well as across the sector, to understand what is a
small part, but an incredibly important part of the growth in the women's
prison population.
Mm.
Which is those women who are coming into our part of the
system on relatively low-level offenses-
Mm
... that may have been recidivist in nature.
And so that's an area that you have asked us about, and I think the chair had a
particular interest in that when we were last talking about-
That's right
... this as a sector.
Yeah.
And we have definitely enrolled our colleagues in Justice to understand the
data-
Mm
... to understand what's happening, and to determine what we can practically do
that actually starts to demonstrate that we can make a difference, at least in a
small part, rather than just keeping it in frameworks,
descriptions, and intent.
Okay.
So that is my reflection. It's incredibly rewarding
work, incredibly difficult work, but I'm 100% proud
of what I know to be the commitment that every single member of our
organization has in trying to make a difference, and enable people to leave us in
a better state with brighter prospects.
But it's a tough job, but I'm delighted that we've got incredible people doing that
work every day.
Hey, well, thank you for coming, and I can assure you what we will end with in our
report is that we look forward to hearing your recommendations-
Mm-hmm
... your new approach, blah, blah, blah, what you're going to see.
Thank you.
Mm.
But, hey, look, I want to thank you for your role.
I know you're moving on, but also to your team.
Thank you.
We all recognize the exceptionally challenging environment you operate in,
but just thank you for coming in today.
Appreciate the time.
Talking to you. Thanks.
Thank you.
Now-
Mr. Chair?
Yeah.
Sorry, could we just... What do you think about just staying in public session and
getting on with the hearings and coming back to consideration on this later?
I'm just going to look at the officials. Can you come back?
Do you mind waiting just while folks-Yeah.
Do you mind waiting and then we'll-
No, that is done.
They don't need to until afterwards, say? Yeah, we don't have officials on that.
Okay. All right. Thank you. Great. So if we just roll on.
We're going straight, everyone- Yeah ...
we're going straight into a hearing.
English language. My list is to,
Piripi
Rakau
Tribal Authority. If that's you, fantastic.
Please come to the table. Looking forward to hearing from you.
We're running just a little bit late.
We've got five minutes with you. We've read your submission,
so if you can just leave us a little bit of time for questioning, that would be
fantastic.
Ready when you are.
Good.
Kia ora tatou. Tuatahi ake, ka mihi ki a koutou, i te
komiti whiriwhiri, te komiti whai, ti whakawātea mai i tēnei wā ki a
mātou o te Pirirakau. Thank you. My name is Heta Gardiner.
I am here on behalf of Te Pirirakau Tribal Authority as our
Kaihau Tu.
Te Pirirakau Tribal Authority strongly opposes this bill.
It is our view that this bill is a solution looking for a problem.
It offers no practical benefit but carries significant constitutional
and cultural risk. English is already the
dominant language of our courts, our schools, commerce, and in our
streets.
Around 95% of people here in New Zealand speak English,
compared to 4.28%
that speak Māori,
and 0.5% of the population reported to be using sign
language according to our most recent census data.
95% versus 4.28 versus
0.5. The English language is not at risk.
So what problem are we actually solving?
It was the Māori language that was removed from early childhood
education material.
It is the use of Māori language that has been
reduced within government departments and in some cases
removed from correspondence with international partners.
The Māori Language Commission has warned the Māori language
is at risk.
And just this very week, this week, the Māori language
voices on our airwaves have been diminished with substantial
funding cuts. There is a genuine concern for iwi radio.
It is the Māori language that is under attack, and a
bill to affirm the status of the already dominant
language
and now viewed as a waste of time and a waste of resource and a
blatant example of political posturing.
Unlike Te Reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language, English
is not vulnerable and does not require legislative protection.
Elevating it to official status
doesn't improve public services.
It simply dilutes the specific protections meant for
at-risk languages.
Te Reo Māori is a taonga under Article 2 of Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
The Crown has a duty of active protection, not just
passive tolerance.
When one language is still recovering from state-sponsored suppression,
legislating the dominance of the already dominant language
is inconsistent with the principles of the Tiriti o Waitangi.
This bill doesn't sit in a vacuum. It's part of a broader shift towards
linguistic monoculturalism.
It signals to Māori that our language and our place in public
administration is becoming at best optional or
secondary,
and at worst now surplus to requirements.
The bill states that legislative recognition of the status of English
as an official language will not affect the status or use
of Te Reo Māori and New Zealand Sign Language as the two other
official languages in New Zealand will not affect the
status or use of Te Reo Māori.
That's just not true.
Anti-Reo Māori sentiment has already been emboldened by government
legislation.
We will have dialogue suggesting we don't need to consider Te Reo
Māori because we use English and
that is already an official language of New Zealand.
That is the type of thinking that will infect our society if this
legislation is to pass. And to think that won't be the
case
is naive.
Canvas the opinions of those individuals that support this bill,
and you'll find that very sentiment is prominent in the thinking.
So what problem are we actually solving?
Pirirakau Tribal Authority steadfastly opposes the
English Language Bill. Tēnā tātou.
Thank you very much. I've got Dan
Rosewarne, who's going to ask you a question.
Yeah. Hey, thanks for that contribution.
I was just wondering if there's been any international examples where you've
seen where similar legislation has
improved public or administration outcomes.
And if you have,
what lessons could we potentially take from that?
Sorry, could you ask the question again?
Yeah. So any examples internationally where a
bill like this has actually improved public outcomes.
I see you mentioned here about the danger of following the US
model.
Yes.
Has there been other similar bits of legislation that have led to-
It being better for the lives of that nation or?
So having a bill like this improving things?
Yeah. Have you seen the opposite or?
No.
Okay.
Can I ask you a question? It's a very good submission.
Your historical perspective is fascinating.
But you mentioned the treaty settlement process and
the obligations on the Crown to
uphold Te Reo.
You make the assertion that by passing this bill, it may
undermine previous treaty settlements.
I just want to ask you to reflect on that, because if that was the case,
then that would be incredibly significant.
But if I could put a proposition to you,
even if this bill passes, it doesn't necessarily mean
that there'll be a change in
naming of places and geographical points of interest
using the Te Reo where that's specified in a treaty
arrangement. Or are you suggesting otherwise?
It is our suggestion that this will have a negative impact on the use and
implementation of Te Reo Maori.
In general.
And so that-- Yes.
Right. But because
you actually talk about treaty claims.
Well, the degradation of Te Reo Maori is something that is
maintained in most treaty claims.
And so if that is denigrated through legislation, then that is a breach.
Okay, cool. Hey, thank you.
I'll take one more question. We're a bit over time, but...
So just to clarify, you mentioned about their funding
cuts, as you put it earlier.
But my understanding is that they're time-limited funding, meaning that it was
temporary. It was never made what we call baseline, which means that it's
guaranteed. So can we please clarify that?
Sure. Are you speaking of the iwi radio funding that I alluded to?
Yes. When you-
Yes, technically.
I know it's-
But iwi radio has also been funded for
over 30 years.
And so whether technically it has been rollover funding for all of that time,
to me is a technicality. It has been a consistent
fund to support Maori language on our
airwaves that has been there for decades-
Mm-hmm
... that has now been slashed.
This amount was time-limited-
Okay
... meaning it was temporary.
Again,
to me, that's semantics.
Semantics.
It's been supported for decades.
All right. Hey, look, we're out of time.
Sure.
But I want to thank you for coming today.
Very good historical context in your submission, and
appreciate you turning up in person. Thank you.
Thank you. Kia ora koutou.
Right. Graham.
Right, yeah, there you are. Cool.
Thank you. We've seen you before.
Yes.
Yes. We've got a few people we've seen before in the ref-- Yes.
Yes. Thank you for having me.
You have the written submission. If anyone has any questions, interrupt
me at any point.
Otherwise, I'm probably telling you things you might already know.
The bit that's slightly interesting to me about this is, my view is that English
is already an official language. There's probably some legal debates.
I would say it's de jure, like as a matter of law, it's an official language.
Others, de facto official language.
So my suggestion would be careful.
The concept of official language is something we put in a lot of treaties, signing
with countries which use other languages.
And so if there's any implication in passing this
bill that we're making English an official language for the
first time, rather than it's been an official language under the common law and
we're just moving into statute, like we moved the law of contempt of court
into statute, which members of this committee will have sat through.
One thing, moving something that's in the common law, protected by that, and now
we're going to protect in the statute.
But be careful before saying this is not an
official language at the moment and we're making it one, because that might have
some effects for things that have happened in the past where some
foreigner overseas has had to apply to a New Zealand court in
one of the official languages of New Zealand, and they always do that in English.
And if English isn't an official language.
And so mostly my submission is, I don't mind where the
protection of English as an official language is.
It could be in the common law, as I would say it currently is.
It could be in statute. Probably not much of a difference.
But be careful in how you're doing this.
We're very keen on your clause 17, which you haven't mentioned
yet. So hopefully Dr. Xu Nan is going to talk about
it.
Yeah, I think just to pick up on that particular point, there are other places
where English is not an official language, but a de facto language.
Yes.
Like England.
So are you saying that if they
kept it as it is, then from an international law or convention
perspective, that remains it is. But the minute you make it into an
official language, then it has implications to
any agreement prior to that.
It could, and the risks are probably not that-- It's not going to happen a lot,
but you can imagine someone trying it in a court.
And it's just like, this isn't going to happen much. It's the risk.
It's that you could add or change a few words in the introduction, depending on how
you put this into law if you do. Just to make sure everyone's clear,
it's always been an official language of New Zealand or has been
since 1840,
would be my date. Just be careful because if you say
it's now an official language,
for the first time,
someone will make the argument. And my guess would be like, if someone was to make
the argument now, they'd go to court, and the court would tell them, "Don't be
silly. English is an official language.
Of course, you apply in a New Zealand court in English." But this says, "Use an
official language," and there are only two official languages, and the court would
just say, "You're wrong." But if you put something in a statute which, no, no,
Parliament's actually very clear.
This is the first time English has ever been an official
language.Someone will give it a go,
and someone will have to spend $10,000 on a lawyer defending it.
And it's not going to make a difference, but it'll be a waste of court's time and a
waste of other people's time, and you can avoid that by changing one sentence.
Right. Mr. Todd Stevenson.
I think that was basically it, because I think-- Yeah.
So-
Some drafting clarification.
Yes.
Thank you for that.
So just to clarify, because we're all very keenly interested in this
point.
What I take out of what you've just said to the committee is that
there is a potential risk. You don't see it as
particularly significant-
No
... but we need to be mindful of-
Yes
... the potential unintended consequences.
Yes. And so, my suggesting would be that the way you do it is you are
moving the protection from the common law to the statute, just like you did with-
Last one, Dr. Soon
... the court.
Just in terms of that last statute point, once you start putting English as an
official language, and this is something we've been discussing, in
which case it should have given the same level of treatment
across all official languages. In which case, do you also see an
argument could be made that everything needs to be done in all three languages
because all three languages are now completely equal?
Probably not. That would probably more arise
from the way the other laws are written.
So, you have the Maori Language Act, or forget the current--
And the law that made New Zealand Sign Language an official language,
that has extra protections for those.
So you've got the
former Maori Language Commission, you've got specific rights in the New Zealand
Sign Language Act, where you're allowed to use New Zealand Sign Language as
of right in interacting with courts and all those sorts of things.
Those laws are currently for English, the High Court rules says use
English. And so,
you would probably need laws to change other laws, New
Zealand Sign Language legislation, if you wanted that sort of change.
It's not something that'll probably happen from this.
Thank you for turning up again on such short notice-
Thank you for having me
... but
always good contributions. Right, now we're going to Zoom.
Are you there?
Good afternoon. We've got five minutes with you.
Kia ora. My name's Remu, and I want to be really clear
from the outset that I think this bill has the potential to cause a lot
of harm across our society,
and I oppose it for a whole bunch of reasons.
I appreciate you've had a really busy day already, so please bear with me.
I'll take my written submission as read.
I did answer the three questions that the committee asked of submitters.
So,
I'll just quickly go over with you why I believe that
framing it as a common sense tidy-up or
administrative tidy-up to reflect a so-called linguistic
reality of our country is deeply
concerning to me. I believe the harm that this bill
will cause will be measurable and long-lasting.
Some may say it's only symbolic, but symbolism shapes
norms, which shapes behavior,
which shapes outcomes.
And a law that singles out English like this
is meant to send a hierarchy symbol that
English is
the real language
of the country, that it is the priority, and that the other official
languages are optional extras. And this matters
because as we all know, te reo Maori and New Zealand Sign Language were not
made official languages through tidy-up processes.
They were fought for.
And that was because the users of those languages faced
suppression, exclusion, and many, many barriers to
participation in everyday life in our society.
And that's mostly, by and large, what official language status is for.
It's to protect, to resource, and to normalize languages that have been
marginalized.
I have got my notes up, and I've got my submission up, and I will leave a fair bit
of time for you to ask questions.
But I just did want to also
go over the three reasons why a government would
undertake language planning.
And this is language planning, despite it being a very poor attempt
at it. So the three main reasons would be linguistic,
where a government has specific aims around protecting a
language. And as far as I understand it, this has not been given
as one of the specific aims of this bill.
And across the world, you don't get this with English because it is a
dominant language. It's a world language.
The second reason why a government undertakes language planning
is semi-linguistic, where they're attempting to make societal functions easier.
So for example, Germany reviewed its spelling system, and the government made
official changes for the sake of convenience.
China introduced a specific
pinyin in order to standardize things in
communication.
And the final reason why a government might undertake language planning is extra
linguistic. So this is where governments are giving specific languages,
specific status,
and role in law and policy.
And this is the most politically charged and motivated,
where governments are directly intervening in what goes on
around language use in a country.
And this can look like the planned introduction of a mother tongue,
as what happened in post-independence Malaysia,
but it can also look like designating what official language use
is in a country.
Making English an official language is
allocating legal recognition and institutional roles to a
languageOur country is highly
multilingual, home to about 160 languages.
So in countries like ours, language planning is mostly used to
address the status and the resourcing of minoritised,
marginalized, and indigenous languages, because by its nature, the
dominant language does not require such designation
in law. As mentioned by other speakers,
it is also already de facto official.
So this bill, I believe, primarily functions as a political signal about national
identity and creating a hierarchy of languages,
which will have real effects. And I want to mihi to some of the speakers
before me who have outlined the specific effects it will
have on te reo Māori
and tangata whenua, and I would also refer members of the Select Committee
back to Waitangi Tribunal claim Wai 11.
And please just go over and read that report.
It adds a lot of context to
why designating English an official language
attempts to put it on the same level as te reo Māori
and New Zealand Sign Language, and that is simply not the case.
I'll leave you a bit of time to ask me any questions.
We're just about
out of time now, but I'm going to allow one question from Dr. Sunan.
Thank you. Thank you for that submission, Rimu.
Just quick question, you mentioned language ideology, and early on we heard
submitters mention about social cohesion, and then that ties into
following in terms of laws, et cetera.
What would this bill, in terms of language ideology, mean
in the context of Aotearoa's history and the
role of either tikanga Māori or te reo Māori?
Yeah.
In the context of our history,
we have spent a lot of time
suppressing te reo Māori
and New Zealand Sign Language.
But
putting it on a pedestal, putting English on a pedestal like this
implies that the use of te reo Māori and NZSL has to be
balanced against English,
and this
really, really risks undermining the language revitalization
that has already happened,
and continues to happen, and will happen regardless in
community. But the point of
entrenching
English as an official language is ideological.
It is encouraging cultural dynamics by implying that
English isn't well-resourced, that it isn't well-supported.
It's an entirely unnecessary bill.
It's not going to solve any communication problems,
because those problems do not exist.
It is ludicrous to suggest otherwise.
Okay.
Yeah.
Hey, thank you, Rimu.
Thank you so much.
Thank you for joining us this afternoon-
No, thank you
... and making that contribution.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Right. Now, we've got the good professor in the chair.
We've got five minutes with you.
Your submission we've read, and-
It's mercifully short.
Yeah, cool.
Kia ora to e very committee. And as you know, Dean Knight, Professor of Law at Te
Herenga Waka Victoria University.
And just, let's be clear, as other submitters have said, English
is already an official language of our nation, and
that is so understandably by dint of custom and
usage. And the fact that its status is not spelt out in
legislation does not alter that legal
fact. And I would point to the way that the authority of Cabinet is
not in any way diminished by the fact that Cabinet is not mentioned
in any legislation at all and is only a creation of convention.
And indeed, I won't spend much time on that, because the bill admits that English
already is an official language, and that's nothing new.
I've seen similar advice from within government by dint of
official information requests from around the time of the passage of the New
Zealand Sign Language
Bill to that effect. It's a long-standing understanding
of government. So it follows that from an instrumental point of view, this
bill is entirely unnecessary. Legislative recognition
adds nothing from an instrumental point of view,
and I don't really want to be drawn into the political reasons why we may be
going through this whole exercise.
That said, I also can't strongly object or object too strongly
to the spelling out of constitutional rules, of which this is one,
an accessible way. That's a matter of constitutional literacy.
And so
codification, where we have opportunities, might be helpful in terms of
understanding what our constitution is and how it operates.
However, my very strong submission here is the proper place for this provision
is in the Constitution Act, and all three official languages should
then and there be spelt out in terms.
And I've given you some suggestions-
Yes, very helpful
... in my submission about how you could do that.
And all I'd say is I'd invite you to push your officials quite strongly
about if you wanted to follow that path, how you could get that
adopted within the scope of that bill.
That's the proper place, or perhaps in the Bill of Rights Act or somewhere else,
but spelling out all the three official languages and ways would
be, if we're going to bother with codification, that's a better way forward.
Well, I'm sure that the Honorable Dr.
Duncan Webb wants to sort of raise-
Yeah
... constitutional matters with you.
Dr. Professor,
very thank you again for coming in.
Look,
my question is, some languages seem a bit more official than others
in a kind of Orwellian way,
in the sense that
if I was given a speeding ticket in Te Reo
and didn't pay it,
I think I'd probably have an argument.
Whereas if someone who is a Te Reo speaker is given a speeding ticket in
English
They haven't got an argument. So the languages are not of equal
status.
And I guess my question is, if we start saying these
languages, particularly Te Reo and English, which are
written languages,
are of equal status, where does that leave us in that
is there a dominant language by law, or is that part of the customary
law, which is kind of just the background noise that we live in?
Well,
just to pick up on that point is
I'm suggesting that we collect up our official languages,
and status is one thing. How that operates as a matter of constitutional systems
and protections, all those things may vary between them, and indeed, that's why I
specify in the possible language the recognize that Te
Reo Maori is an official language in accordance with the provisions of-
Yes
... the Maori Language Act, Te Reo Maori, and the same with New Zealand
Sign Language, because it recognizes that there is a system and a body of ways
about expectations about how they are to be operated.
I'm not suggesting from a codification point of view we should
change that. We should accept what we've got now
and spell that out. What you seem to be speaking to is what's
probably the position in Canada, where their two official languages are
spelled out, I think in their charter it is, but actually expressly
specifies that they're of equal status and effect.
And that's a different means of codification because it would be changing the
status quo. I'm suggesting at the moment that you stick with the
status quo and spell-
Do you think, but at the status quo, would you say that's-- because it's got to be
legal, right?
Yeah.
I like your analysis of customary law and its
force. Would you say as a matter of custom, English is
the de facto or the first language?
Well, what-
Like my speeding ticket about-
Yeah
... example is not a stupid one, right?
In that sense, in the language I use, it's the regular day-to-day basis within
government surrounding state
related proceedings. That's the-
Yeah
... and you can--
Yeah, that's the dominant-- And that's why we need the other languages spelt
unspecified to recorrect that and provide
opportunities for other languages to be recognized.
Okay.
But it's not-- I mean,
I'm a realist. There is a reality that we can't avoid here, that English is the
dominant language-
Mm
... of the government and of the state.
All right. Hey, thank you again, Professor-
Thank you
... for turning up and very meaningful contribution.
Thank you.
So, Jetty de Jong. Is she on the line?
On the TV.
Jetty.
She's coming through now.
Yeah.
Hello.
You're having a busy day.
Kia ora. I am, yes.
Right.
Probably not as busy as you, but anyway
All right. You've got five minutes. Sorry.
Yeah. So, well, I've already introduced myself, but in case the people there are
different, so my name's Jetty de Jong.
No, they're not. No, they're all the same people.
All right. Okay. Well, I
have asked myself why I felt strongly enough to make a submission on this
bill because, as has been pointed out many times, English is already the dominant
language spoken here, and it's really just confirming the status quo.
But I feel that this bill is actually very damaging to
our national unity and also to our Tiriti relationships.
My parents were Dutch immigrants, and
my mother often used to say, before she came to New Zealand, there
were two things she knew about this country.
One was that it was the first country in the world to give women the vote, and the
second was that it was an English-speaking country.
So they were in no doubt about that in 1951 and
1961, and nothing has changed since.
And I just don't see any reason to
formalize the position that we already have.
As my husband said in his submission, it's a little bit like proposing that the
sparrow should be made an official bird because there are far more of them here
than kiwis.
I just feel like there's only negatives and disadvantages in progressing this bill,
and my biggest concern is that it signals a real lack of respect from
the government towards our Tiriti partner.
The official status accorded to Te Reo Maori 50 years ago was only achieved
after over a century of struggle to prevent its eradication
and a huge effort on the part of Maori leaders at the time.
And given that English is not endangered in Aotearoa, New Zealand, or anywhere
else in the world,
I just feel it's insulting to accord English the same status as our
endangered Te Reo Maori, and it signals,
in the minds of myself and many people who
have, I guess, similar views to me, are some sort of demotion of
Te Reo Maori.
English is the language of the colonizers, and it was a tool used by
colonizers to suppress the indigenous language.
So elevating English to the status of an official language signals to many that,
and especially to Maori, a return to those colonial priorities and just a lack of
good faith in our Tiriti
partnership. And I guess it really just makes me ashamed to be a New
Zealander. There are so many
legislative attacks already onto Tiriti and
Maori in the last few years. This is just another one.
And I want to live in a country that has a good
international reputation as a country that honors its
promises and all of its people, and
this bill is just another example why I can't do that.
So yeah, really that's just
my view and my presentation. I feel that by engaging in this
process, the government doesn't
It just gives me the impression of being petty and weak,
and it diminishes the manner of the government to
be engaging in this process. So-
All right. Hey, thank you for
your contribution again today.
Really appreciate you taking the time to make a submission.
Right.
Thank you.
We've got-
Oh, you're here. Please come to the-
Right.
Yeah.
Tena koutou. Ko Te Tiana toku ingoa.
And
as I'm sitting here today,
I'm a mother, I'm an education professional, and I'm a board
member of a local school. And I was really thinking about what drove me to
say, "Yes", and I'll give an oral submission, and it's because I want to represent
the next generation of Kiwis. I want their voices to be heard here
today, because whatever decisions you make will impact them tomorrow.
So, that's where I'm coming from. But also, as I'm sitting in this room, listening
to these colleagues,
esteemed colleagues from universities and linguists, I'm thinking,
isn't that poetic justice? Because I was born in
Ukraine, and knowing the history of English language, it
originates from Proto-Indo-European, emerging 6,500
years ago. And here I am today defending,
while it's a language that has evolved because of
migration, because of cultural exchange, adaptation and
borrowing. And here we are, the poetic
justice that we have to say, "No, we don't want this
to be an official language." And I do not support this bill.
Because ultimately,
English is in its ascendancy.
It is growing populous.
It has spread through
exploitation, trade, and colonization.
It incorporated words from many cultures and adopted to new
environments, was carried and reshaped by diverse people.
So English is fundamentally a language of movement, exchange, and
integration.
However, there's another point I want to pick up on.
And that's what the last speaker was starting to say.
As I was writing my submission, it became quite clear that the proposal to
make English an official language must also be considered in a broader
environment. Many voters, including myself, are not simply
evaluating your proposals, but we're also thinking about why this
issue?
Why now? Especially with everything that's going on in the world.
At what cost to more pressing matters?
At what cost to my children?
What are the drivers behind prioritizing symbolic legislation such as this?
And these
concerns,
we know that they consume parliamentary time,
attention, they divert focus away from substantive policy
challenges and contribute to public cynicism about political
motive.
So the implications are quite clear.
Given its history, it's difficult to argue that English requires protection
through official status.
Its strength lies in adaptability and global reach, not in legislative
reinforcement. At the same time, elevating English formally
risks undermining efforts to revitalize Te Reo Maori, creates
tension with commitments under Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and reinforces
perceptions of exclusion.
Again, many voters like myself are increasingly aware that our
parliamentary process has been captured to delay,
distract, and derail meaningful progress for our
children.
So here we are.
Biculturalism and multiculturalism is what needs to be protected.
In this context, where public confidence and political priorities is
already strained, advancing symbolic legislation
of this kind risks reinforcing the view that parliamentary
process like this is not aligned with the needs of the
people it serves to represent.
Okay. Thank you. I've got a question from Dr.
Sunan.
Thank you. Good to see you again.
Thank you.
Something you mentioned in terms of English being essentially a
chimeric language, really struck with the fact do you see any
challenges or confusion around not specifying what kind
of English and people then debating on whose English is the
official English?
Most probably, but humans evolve, and so do languages and so do
cultures. So of course it's going to create those problems.
What is the official language?
Slang? Well,
everything.
It will create problems down the end, not just in the exclusionary factors.
Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you for making the effort to come on behalf of
the next generation and speaking to us today.
Thank you.
Right. We've got our last submitter who is online.
Good afternoon.
Are you there?
Hi. You might need to unmute. Is that right?
I think she's muted.
Oh, cool.
Nice to see you.
Now, we've got five minutes. We've read your submission.
Maybe highlight and then we might have a question or two for you.
Oh, kia ora. Kia ora koutou. Can you see me? And can you hear?
Yes. Yes.
Ka pai.
Nei rā te mihi ki a koutou i tē wā. Ki te taha tokū
māmā, nō Ruatoki ahau, ko Tūhoe te iwi.
Ki te taha tokū pāpā, nō Rāhui Pokika ahau, ko Waikato te iwi.
So this is an individual submission.
But I just have to let you know, I'm a lecturer of education, primary
teaching. I'm also a new member to
the-Tertiary Education Union Council.
So
I'm with Te Wānanga o Aotearoa, but it's an individual
submission. Ka pai. I'm just going to get straight to it.
He mihi ana
kautai.
So I'm here to express my strong opposition to the English Language
Bill. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
This bill solves no problems, delivers no practical benefit,
and uses public money and parliamentary time on an issue that simply
doesn't exist. English already functions as a dominant
language of government,
law, education, and public life in Aotearoa.
It is the language of Parliament, the courts, the public service, and
almost all official communications.
Sorry, I'm probably going to not take a breath, just carry on reading.
There is no evidence of confusion, disadvantage, or administrative
difficulty arising from English not being explicitly named in
legislation. In fact, government officials have publicly stated
that legislating English would make no practical difference
to how the system operates. So we're here debating a bill
that changes nothing in practice, yet still requires policy
development, legal drafting, departmental analysis, and full
parliamentary processing. All of that comes at a real cost
to taxpayers.
At a time when public services are under pressure, when health, education,
housing, and justice all face significant
challenges, it is difficult to justify spending public money on
a bill that does not improve outcomes for anyone.
Beyond the waste of resources, there is a deeper concern.
Although the bill claims it
does not diminish the status of Te Reo Māori, many New Zealanders are worried
that the message it sends,
English is not endangered, it does not require protection.
Te Reo Māori, on the other hand, has required decades of
revitalization efforts supported by progressive governments.
By elevating English in statute,
when
it is already dominant
in official domains, this bill risks being used rhetorically
to push back against bilingualism or to question the presence of Te Reo
Māori in public spaces. Even if that is not the
intent, it may be the effect.
Hang on. Just move my notes up.
Sorry.
Legislation needs to strengthen social cohesion, not create new points of
tension. It should also respond to genuine public need.
There is no evidence that New Zealanders are calling for this bill.
There's no evidence of harm that it addresses, and there's no evidence that
it will improve clarity, efficiency, or fairness in
public administration. What it does do is divert time,
money, and attention away from areas where
legislative action could make a meaningful difference,
such as reinstating Te Ahu o te Reo for kaiako in schools
across Aotearoa. For these reasons, I respectfully urge the committee to
decline the progress
of the English Language Bill. E mihi ana ki a kautou i tēnei wā.
Kia ora.
Thank you
very much. Hey, look, I want to thank you for your submission.
We've heard a number of submissions, so I don't think you should take out of
it that we haven't listened to what you've said.
But I want to thank you for making a submission and being with us today.
Kia ora.
Okay.
Right.
Nice to see you, professor. Right.
We're going into private session